Metal3 for Incubation (#1)
Nordix/toc: proposals/incubation/metal3.md

# Metal3 proposal for CNCF incubation

## Table of Contents

> TODO

Reviewer: just adding a comment here to make sure this does not stay as TODO

## About Metal3

The Metal3 project (pronounced: “Metal Kubed”) provides components for baremetal

> host management with Kubernetes. You can enroll your bare metal machines,

Reviewer: I suggest not using personal pronouns in technical document, I would use in the final doc things like: "user", or passive sentences or something along these lines.

provision operating system images, and then, if you like, deploy Kubernetes
clusters to them. From there, operating and upgrading your Kubernetes clusters
can be handled by Metal3. Moreover, Metal3 is itself a Kubernetes application,
so it runs on Kubernetes, and uses Kubernetes resources and APIs as its
interface.

Metal3 is one of the providers for the Kubernetes sub-project Cluster API.
Cluster API provides infrastructure agnostic Kubernetes lifecycle management,

> and Metal3 brings the baremetal implementation.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
and Metal3 brings the bare metal implementation.
```

Furthermore Metal3 utilizes a component from the OpenStack ecosystem called
Ironic. Ironic is used for booting and installing machines. Metal3 handles the
installation of Ironic as a standalone component (there’s no need to bring along
the rest of OpenStack). Ironic is supported by a mature community of hardware
vendors and supports a wide range of bare metal management protocols which are
continuously tested on a variety of hardware. Ironic and Metal3 community work
closely with a mutual CI which ensures Metal3 can provision machines, no matter
the brand of hardware.

In summary, you can write Kubernetes manifests representing your hardware and
your desired Kubernetes cluster layout. Then Metal3 can:

> - Discover your hardware inventory

Reviewer 2: Did we merge the firmware update PR yet?

Author: firmware update ?

- Configure BIOS and RAID settings on your hosts
- Optionally clean a host’s disks as part of provisioning
- Install and boot an operating system image of your choice
- Deploy Kubernetes
- Upgrade Kubernetes or the operating system in your clusters with a
 non-disruptive rolling strategy
- Automatically remediate failed nodes by rebooting them and removing them from
 the cluster if necessary

## Sandbox Acceptance

The Metal3 project was accepted into CNCF sandbox on 8th of September 2020. [PR link](https://github.com/cncf/toc/pull/408).

## Progress Since Sandbox

> The Metal3 project went through many changes since its acceptance to incubation.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The Metal3 project has advanced a lot since its acceptance to incubation.
```
Or something like that. `went through many changes` is weird past tense

> Repositories that have proved to be unmaintainable or lost their importance have

Reviewer 2: `Proved to be unmaintainable` is weird choice of words.

Reviewer: IMO it is a common choice of words, but I guess the correct grammar is "have been proved to..."

been archived after extensive community discussions.

> As it stands today the project revolves around 4 core component plus a

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
As it stands today the project revolves around four core component plus a
```
Numbers less than 10 => words.

development environment, a documentation repository , a community repository,
a website repository and an infrastructure as code (IAAC) repository that
handles the CI/CD processes for the project.

The 4 core components are:

- [baremetal-operator](https://github.com/metal3-io/baremetal-operator)
- [cluster-api-provider-metal3](https://github.com/metal3-io/cluster-api-provider-metal3)
- [ip-address-manager](https://github.com/metal3-io/ip-address-manager)
- [ironic-image](https://github.com/metal3-io/ironic-image)

> Metal3 Community governance documents are located at [community](https://github.com/metal3-io/community)

Reviewer 2: Maybe make a list out of supporting repositories of the repos below.

repository.

The development environment can be found at: [metal3-dev-env](https://github.com/metal3-io/metal3-dev-env)
repository.

The design documents and the user-guide is located at [metal3-docs](https://github.com/metal3-io/metal3-docs)
repository.

> The website's source is located at [metal3-io.github.io](https://github.com/metal3-io/metal3-io.github.io)

Reviewer 2: Link the end result ie book here too.

repository.

The CI/CD IAAC repository is at [project-infra](https://github.com/metal3-io/project-infra)
repository.

> 

Reviewer: Should we add the book here? https://book.metal3.io/

## Technical Advances

Aggregated list of technical advances since sandbox acceptance: 

> ### Cluster-api-provider-metal3

Reviewer 2: Choose if you put in the repo name, ie. `cluster-api-provider-metal3` or use English `Cluster API Provider Metal3`.

Other repos have other mixed styles as well, mentioning only once here.

> - node reuse feature [#169](https://github.com/metal3-io/cluster-api-provider-metal3/pull/169)

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- Node reuse feature [#169](https://github.com/metal3-io/cluster-api-provider-metal3/pull/169)
```
Please capitalize the first letters consistently, only mentioning once.

- remediation controller [#157](https://github.com/metal3-io/cluster-api-provider-metal3/pull/157)
- Add v1beta1 types and related changes [#342](https://github.com/metal3-io/cluster-api-provider-metal3/pull/342)
- Support IP Reuse for BMHs using Preallocations [#656](https://github.com/metal3-io/cluster-api-provider-metal3/pull/656)
- Introduce additional providerID format [#563](https://github.com/metal3-io/cluster-api-provider-metal3/pull/563)
- Adoption of CAPI e2e framework Initial [#194](https://github.com/metal3-io/cluster-api-provider-metal3/pull/194)
- Add live-iso support to CAPI Metal3 provider [#189](https://github.com/metal3-io/cluster-api-provider-metal3/pull/189)

> - TODO: Something about Metal3DataTemplates and Metal3Data

Reviewer: - Open up CAPM3 for any control plane provider [#1311](https://github.com/metal3-io/cluster-api-provider-metal3/pull/1311)
- Add TLS configuration flags for CAPM3 [1041](https://github.com/metal3-io/cluster-api-provider-metal3/pull/1041)
- Introduce ReconcileError with Transient and Terminal Error type [910](https://github.com/metal3-io/cluster-api-provider-metal3/pull/910)
- Add flags for configuring rate limits [959](https://github.com/metal3-io/cluster-api-provider-metal3/pull/959)

Reviewer: - Implement CAPI IPAM contract support (https://github.com/metal3-io/cluster-api-provider-metal3/pull/769)
- Enable concurrency in metal3 controllers (https://github.com/metal3-io/cluster-api-provider-metal3/pull/884)
- Add explicit securitycontext to controllers (https://github.com/metal3-io/cluster-api-provider-metal3/pull/822)

Reviewer: - Introduce separate go modules for e2e tests to allow them to be imported independently (https://github.com/metal3-io/cluster-api-provider-metal3/pull/800)

Reviewer: - Rework node reuse logic to handle corner cases in release-0.5 (https://github.com/metal3-io/cluster-api-provider-metal3/pull/425)

Reviewer: - Add webhook readiness and health check (https://github.com/metal3-io/cluster-api-provider-metal3/pull/279)
- Add AGE column to metal3 CRDs (https://github.com/metal3-io/cluster-api-provider-metal3/pull/289)
- Automate releasing process with GitHub actions (https://github.com/metal3-io/cluster-api-provider-metal3/pull/308)

Reviewer: Implement externally managed annotation (https://github.com/metal3-io/cluster-api-provider-metal3/pull/224)
- Add pivoting test based on the e2e test framework (https://github.com/metal3-io/cluster-api-provider-metal3/pull/232)
- Add internal logging mechanism for e2e test framework (https://github.com/metal3-io/cluster-api-provider-metal3/pull/259)
- Backport "Allow disable automated cleaning" (https://github.com/metal3-io/cluster-api-provider-metal3/pull/239)
- Use correct aliases for capm3 api (https://github.com/metal3-io/cluster-api-provider-metal3/pull/241)
- Add BMO inject-ca-from custom patching (https://github.com/metal3-io/cluster-api-provider-metal3/pull/223)

- TODO: IP address management and network-data

> - TODO: Opening up CAPM3 to use it with non KCP control planes

Reviewer: I have listed above

- HardwareData custom resource for host inspection data [#1099](https://github.com/metal3-io/baremetal-operator/pull/1099)
- PreprovisioningImage API and integration [#936](https://github.com/metal3-io/baremetal-operator/pull/936)
- New API and integration of hostFirmwareSettings and firmwareSchema resources [#901](https://github.com/metal3-io/baremetal-operator/pull/901)
 , [#938](https://github.com/metal3-io/baremetal-operator/pull/938)
- Enable RAID for Redfish-based iDRAC driver flavor [#1095](https://github.com/metal3-io/baremetal-operator/pull/1095)
- Reboot API Implementation [#424](https://github.com/metal3-io/baremetal-operator/pull/424)
- Add physicalDisks and controller parameters to HardwareRAID [#1062](https://github.com/metal3-io/baremetal-operator/pull/1062)
- Implement explicit reboot mode options [#795](https://github.com/metal3-io/baremetal-operator/pull/795)
- Add live-iso support [#759](https://github.com/metal3-io/baremetal-operator/pull/759)
- Add support for detached annotation [#827](https://github.com/metal3-io/baremetal-operator/pull/827)
- Add support for ironic custom deploy interface [#884](https://github.com/metal3-io/baremetal-operator/pull/884)

> - TODO: Add ability to use Ironic registry (not sure about the real name) instead of inspector

Reviewer: I have listed the related PR/Feature below

- Implement BMH provisioning E2E test [#1403](https://github.com/metal3-io/baremetal-operator/pull/1403)

> - Implemented support adding pre-provisining Network data for Ironic node [#1380](https://github.com/metal3-io/baremetal-operator/pull/1380)

Reviewer: - Explicit way to auto-detect disk image ChecksumType [#1480](https://github.com/metal3-io/baremetal-operator/pull/1480) 
- Support both Ironic and Inspector inventory formats [#1450](https://github.com/metal3-io/baremetal-operator/pull/1450)
- Expose FirmwareInterface in Node/BMC [#1441](https://github.com/metal3-io/baremetal-operator/pull/1441)
- API version negotiation [#1435](https://github.com/metal3-io/baremetal-operator/pull/1435)
- Ability to pass preprovisioningNetworkData to Ironic [#1380](https://github.com/metal3-io/baremetal-operator/pull/1380)

Author: 1380 is already in the list

> - TODO: Ironic api version/compatibility discovery process from Dmitry

Reviewer: I have listed the feature above

### ip-address-manager

It's a comprehensive tool to manage static IP address allocations in
Cluster API Provider Metal3. It has its own controller and quite a few new
features are added in this repo.

- Pre-allocation of IP addresses

> - TODO: IPv6 support?

Reviewer: - Add TLS configuration flags for IPAM (https://github.com/metal3-io/ip-address-manager/pull/248)
- Add flags for configuring rate limits (https://github.com/metal3-io/ip-address-manager/pull/238)
- Add support for mac (kustomize) (https://github.com/metal3-io/ip-address-manager/pull/267)
- Enable concurrency in ipam controllers (https://github.com/metal3-io/ip-address-manager/pull/213)
- add explicit securitycontexts to controller (https://github.com/metal3-io/ip-address-manager/pull/195)
- Default LeaderElectionResourceLock to leases (https://github.com/metal3-io/ip-address-manager/pull/85)
- Automate releasing process with GitHub actions (https://github.com/metal3-io/ip-address-manager/pull/66)
- Add AGE column to IPAM CRDs (https://github.com/metal3-io/ip-address-manager/pull/51)

> - TODO: IPv6 support?

Reviewer: I might have missed the IPv6 PR but I think the IPV6 support was present when the project entered sandbox

### Ironic-image

> - Custom PXE firmware building and deployment support  [#429](https://github.com/metal3-io/ironic-image/pull/429)

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- Custom iPXE firmware building and deployment support [#429](https://github.com/metal3-io/ironic-image/pull/429)
```

### Other Major Contributions

> - New repository with iPXE firmware builder container utility-images

Reviewer: it is missing the link for the utility repo: https://github.com/metal3-io/utility-images

- Improve end user/developer documentation

> - Added a user-guide in form of the Metal3Book

Reviewer: Link to the book https://book.metal3.io/

- [Medik8s](https://github.com/medik8s?q=metal3&type=all&language=&sort=)

Furthermore maintainers have noticed that there are many more companies
that are actively using Metal3, as representatives of said companies are
opening issues, writing proposals and in general contribute to the project
but have not registered themselves as official adopters.

## Maintainers

A Metal3 maintainer is a participant in the project with the ability to approve
changes proposed to a given repository. Approval access grants a broad ability
to affect the progress of the project as presented by its most important artifact,
the code and related resources. As such it represents a significant level of
trust in an individual's commitment to working with other maintainers and
the community at large for the benefit of the project. Metal3 project also
documents the process to become Maintainer and/or the process to move up in the
Contribution Ladder as well as clearly points out Contributor Roles in the
[community repository](https://github.com/metal3-io/community).

The following table contains the [Metal3's maintainers](https://github.com/metal3-io/community/tree/main/maintainers).

> | Reviewer/Approver  | GitHub ID      | Affiliation                    |

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
| Approver  | GitHub ID      | Affiliation                    |
```
All are approvers.

| ------------------ | -------------- | ------------------------------ |

> | Andrea Fasano      | andfasano      | Red Hat                        |

Reviewer 2: Sort this by either name or company.

Author: sorted by github id as in maintainers file

Reviewer 2: OK, but sorting is not right then. Here is the ALL OWNERS:

```yaml
approvers:
- andfasano
- bfournie
- derekhiggins
- dtantsur
- elfosardo
- furkatgofurov7
- honza
- hroyrh
- iurygregory
- kashifest
- lentzi90
- mboukhalfa
- Rozzii
- smoshiur1237
- tuminoid
- zaneb
``` 

Rozzii is sorted two lines off.

Author: my bad, thanks a lot for catching it up, fixed.

| Derek Higgins      | derekhiggins   | Red Hat                        |
| Dmitry Tantsur     | dtantsur       | Red Hat                        |
| Riccardo Pittau    | elfosardo      | Red Hat                        |
| Furkat Gofurov     | furkatgofurov7 | SUSE                           |
| Honza Pokorny      | honza          | Red Hat                        |
| Himanshu Roy       | hroyrh         | Red Hat                        |
| Iury Gregory       | iurygregory    | Red Hat                        |
| Kashif Khan        | kashifest      | Ericsson Software Technology   |
| Lennart Jern       | lentzi90       | Ericsson Software Technology   |
| Mohammed Boukhalfa | mboukhalfa     | Ericsson Software Technology   |
| Moshiur Rahman     | smoshiur1237   | Ericsson Software Technology   |
| Tuomo Tanskanen    | tuminoid       | Ericsson Software Technology   |
| Adam Rozman        | Rozzii         | Ericsson Software Technology   |
| Zane Bitter        | zaneb          | Red Hat                        |

We have also introduced the option of moving people to emeritus approvers and
reviewers list for people who became less active in the review/maintenance
process.

> ## Community size

Reviewer: I think just "Community" would be better header

Metal3 has had [377 individual contributors](https://metal3.devstats.cncf.io/d/5/companies-table?orgId=11)
on the project’s GitHub repositories from [57 different organizations.](https://metal3.devstats.cncf.io/d/5/companies-table?orgId=1)

The project has [778 Stargazers/Watchers](https://metal3.devstats.cncf.io/d/18/overall-project-statistics-table?orgId=1)
across its repositories.

[DevStats graph](https://metal3.devstats.cncf.io/d/8/dashboards?orgId=1&editPanel=2&from=now-1y&to=now-1h)
shows that we have a fairly consistent number of contributions throughout the
past year.

> 

Reviewer: Maybe we can put here clo monitor link

In addition, we have a very high number of downloads of our container images
from quay.io. Since the download statistics is not publicly visible,
we are not adding any link.

> 

Reviewer: We can make a screen shot from quay stats and upload it to nordix and link it from there same as for the sandbox if you's like to show the stats.

Author: IMO its fine as is.

As an example of our traction the aggregated number of container image

> downloads from the Metal3's container repository from 11-12-2023 to

Reviewer 2: 4 day period?

Author: five :D , a week

Reviewer 2: A week is such a random time period statistically. It could dip down or spike up massively for any reason. A month would be more legit IMO.

Author: Done

release documentation detailing the release process for that repository:
[BMO](https://github.com/metal3-io/baremetal-operator/blob/main/docs/releasing.md),
[CAPM3](https://github.com/metal3-io/cluster-api-provider-metal3/blob/main/docs/releasing.md),
[IPAM](https://github.com/metal3-io/ip-address-manager/blob/main/docs/releasing.md)
and
[ironic-image](https://github.com/metal3-io/ironic-image/blob/main/docs/releasing.md).

GitHub Actions based release automation is in place, e.g.
[CAPM3](https://github.com/metal3-io/cluster-api-provider-metal3/blob/main/.github/workflows/release.yaml)
and
[release verification script](https://github.com/metal3-io/cluster-api-provider-metal3/blob/main/hack/verify-release.sh)
ensures software has up to date dependencies and no publicly known
vulnerabilities exist in the repository.

During the sandbox phase, Metal3 has put a lot of effort into securing the supply
chain by pinning down Dockerfiles, GitHub workflows, Go modules and other
dependencies as well as ensuring GitHub configuration for the whole organization
is consistent and secure, with branch protection in place and not allowing code

> merging without proper reviews and tests. Dependabot has been implemented to

Reviewer: Dependabot has been adopted instead of "implemented"

bump dependencies and keep an eye on the published vulnerabilities in the
dependencies, in addition to pre-existing Renovate bot configurations.

Metal3 has been closely tracking its OpenSSF Scorecard evaluations for all of
the repositories, and while there is still plenty of work to do to achieve
very high scores, the average score for a Metal3 repository has risen 1-2 points
during 2023. We are also working towards
[OpenSSF Best Practices badge](https://www.bestpractices.dev/en), formerly known
as CII badge, as well as implementing the other missing checks, like Fuzzing
and Signed Releases.

Metal3 has also improved its security posture by moving into rootless containers
with any elevated permissions provided by capabilities, implementing very
limiting default security context for all containers and defaulting to baseline
PSA where applicable. We have also added configuration options to enforce use

> of TLS 1.3 only.

Reviewer: We could mention that we are working on automated container signing infra

Reviewer 2: We're not mentioning TODO items here, only accomplishments. We don't mention plans for other content either. (We imply signing and other improvements by aiming to get higher openssf scorecard/clomonitor scores/CII badge etc.)

Metal3 also has implemented a (private) security roadmap detailing future
improvements into security posture, process and documentation.

## Statement on Alignment with the CNCF Mission

As cloud native technologies become the norm for organizations to deploy and

> manage their applications, Metal³ aims to apply similar patterns such as

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
manage their applications, Metal3 aims to apply similar patterns such as
```

declarative APIs to allow administrators to manage their underlying
infrastructure.

> The Metal³ project believes in CNCF’s mission to make cloud-native technologies

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The Metal3 project believes in CNCF’s mission to make cloud-native technologies
```

accessible for all, that is why the Metal3 project is trying to make physical
infrastructure management more accessible to the cloud native ecosystem and to
the worldwide open source software community.

## Alignment with Other CNCF Projects

The Metal3 stack integrates into Kubernetes Cluster API which is a CNCF project.

> Metal3-io's IPAM is also used by cluster-api-provider-vsphere's CI. 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Metal3's IPAM is also used by cluster-api-provider-vsphere's CI. 
```
